This project acts as a repository for all localised text resources across the
various FORC client components.

The aim is to reduce the number of language DLLs shipped and have a more
obvious process for maintaining the localised resources. Currently each project
has local resources which can lead to duplication and makes getting updated
text localised more difficult.

The disadvantage is that we maybe providing localisation strings for components
that are not actually required.

PLAN

Potentially provide a C# tool to manage conversion between the source
spreadsheet, the resx file(s) actually compiled into the application as well as
exporting/importing changes to a second spreadsheet that can be sent out for
localisation reducing the need to hunt through the source spreadsheet for
changes.

This could optionally allow subsets of the projects to be included to reduce
the impact of unwanted strings being released.

Operations:

1) Convert
Take the contents of the source spreadsheet and ensure they are included in the
resx file and any language specific resx files. Retain check for resources in
the resx file that have not originated in the spreadsheet. There should be none
of these, image resources continue to be language independent and stored in
the individual project resx files. This will however spot a case where a
developer adds a new resource directly into the resx file rather than adding it
to the spreadsheet and converting.

2) Export
Take the contents of the source spreadsheet and create a new spreadsheet
containing any entries for which the text has changed and/or one or more
languages does not have a translation. May need a mechanism in the source
spreadsheet to indicate that a given resource does not require localisation and
should not therefore be included in the export spreadsheet. Also store the hash
of the english version in the source spreadsheet so we can detect when a value
is out of date and whether the content changes between export and import.

3) Import
Update the contents of the source spreadsheet from the contents of the imported
spreadsheet, which should be an updated version of the Export spreadsheet.

